<!-- post-title: The curiosity of secondary school mathematics education -->
<!-- post-timestamp: 1539751161984 -->

The initial line I had set out for this post was "Mathematics is an
exact science."

Is it? In statistics, a random variable is not exactly known, indeed it
is explicitly **not** known. One does not know the number of dots facing
up upon the roll of a standard six-sided die. But one does know that it
is is not going to be more than 6 or less than 1. One might also say
that if the die was fair the probability of any given number on any
given throw would be 1/6.

In this case, the exactness refers to that we know exact bounds, and
conditional exactness on the likelihood of an event.

You might say that mathematics is the study of *what* is exact and *if*
something is exact - through the medium of *how* is it exact?

Sadly though, human language (English in this case) is subjective and
individually interpreted, and as such, a nice answer like that with
closure and easy accessibility to the masses is not permitted.

# The mathematics conflict

**Mathematics is defined by the individual defining it.** It is the art
of definition itself. It is most ironic that a subject defined by it's
exactness is so inexact in it's interpretation.

Here's a cute table of some plausible interpretations of mathematics, by
certain different
people:

| **Who they are** |          **What they think mathematics is**          |
| :--------------: | :--------------------------------------------------: |
|      Me, 6       |                       Numbers                        |
|      Me, 8       |                    12 x 12 = 144                     |
|      Me, 10      |                  Infinity plus one                   |
|      Me, 12      |            x(x + 2) = x<sup>2</sup> + 2x             |
|      Me, 14      |                That thing I'm good at                |
|      Me, 16      |           That thing I'm no longer good at           |
|      Me, 18      |                      Hard work                       |
|      Me, 20      |                       ?\!?\!?                        |
|   Friend's mum   |        "Oh I was never good at maths, ha ha"         |
|   Politicians    | We teach this to kids so they can work and pay taxes |
|     Big Shaq     |      2 plus 2 is 4 minus 1 thats 3 quick maths       |

Most mathematics, particularly the pure stuff, is dry. Really, really
dry. Almost the science of dryness.

To those who love it, often the love comes from the obsession over the
limit of abstractness. For others, it comes from being "good at it".
Often these people have a career in it.

Career mathematicians owe it to the masses to recognise that for the
majority of people, the mathematics they will learn will never feed
either of these urges.

# Teaching mathematics

So in that case, how do we present it to children?

We want to maximise the education for the few that will end up as career
mathematicians, and maximise the education for the many that won't.

-----

First, a word of warning. There are some popular misinformed opinions on
this.

One amongst some university students and graduates in the hard sciences
is that it is worth the inefficiencies. For example, official figures in
the UK, show that 49% of people under 30 go into higher education, and
46.5% of those go into sciences. This means that only 22.8% do end up
building upon the knowledge gained from their education, and so the
other 77.2% are stuck doing trigonometry. Even in my mathematics degree,
I could count on one hand the number of times I needed to know anything
about trigonometry. At the very least, learning to manage finances would
be a better use of time.

Another is the perception that mathematics needs to be taught to
everyone as it is the clever subject. A measuring stick of sorts. Some
suggesting this might have gone through it already, and confuse it being
good because they did it and it actually being good.

It is true though, that many of the smartest students will blindly
gravitate to the perceived biggest challenge, and any solution must take
this into account.

# A better mathematics education

Mathematics needs a split.

When we are first learning mathematics, it is almost completely
applicable to all. Arithmetic is needed to pay bills and file taxes.

So it seems logical that they should split at a certain age. There is
precedent with this in the way that science splits into biology,
chemistry and physics. In the UK, these subjects are split up when the
children are aged 13 to 14.

It would make sense, in the UK at least, to split Mathematics into two
at this age.

The names for each subject are important to get right, to ensure a good
balance between each. For the sake of this article, I shall call them
"Pure" and "Applications".

  - Pure
    
      - from ages 13 - 16 (required)
          - Algebra
          - Basic number theory
          - Infinity
          - Equations
          - Formal logic
      - from ages 16 - 18 (not required for 16 - 18 Applications)
          - Proofs
          - Calculus
          - Trigonometry

  - Applications
    
      - from ages 13 - 16 (required)
          - Finances
          - Unit conversions
          - Statistics (probability, normal distribution, z-tables)
          - Geometry (taught in sync with mechanics from Physics)
          - Algorithms
      - from ages 16 - 18
          - Hypothesis testing
          - Algorithms
          - Coding

Additionally:

- statistics and algorithms would be required, but smaller and more refined at 13 - 16
- mechanics would be in physics
- this may be missing some key components

-----

This exercise got me thinking... there are many subjects where
separating into pure and practical parts would make more sense, like:

  - physics and engineering
  - organic and inorganic chemistry
  - physical and human geography

I wonder what academics in those fields would think of an analogous
argument for their area?
